Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
The name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, of man.
Now if we reflect, my brothers and sisters, that the church
begins the liturgical year, the head of the year, as she calls it, Rosh Hashanah.
If we reflect the church begins the liturgical year on September 1st, several things fall into place which would not otherwise be obvious.
We would notice, for example, that
August 15th is the final feast of the Virgin Mary in the Church of Aguirre.
There's a sentence in which the Church of Aguirre ends with her dormition, her falling asleep.
And then two weeks later, about, comes the head of the year.
crown of the year.
And then one week after that, we start with her birth.
So that at the beginning and at the end of the year, we honor the mother of the Lord.
The glory, honor,
Due to the Virgin Mary, it's not something that was obvious to the church from the very beginning.
In one sense, the Virgin Mary has to grow on you.
And I suspect that most of you claim that as your own experience, that she grew on you.
I just noticed something the other day, which I had never noticed before, and I've been at this for decades and decades and decades.
The collective works of St. John Chrysostom fills shelves of means Greek Petrology.
He very rarely refers to the Virgin Mary,
very, very early, and never calls him the Theotokos.
Not one time.
In fact, if he were living today, he would not be recognized as an Orthodox Theologian for that very reason.
He lived the things that he knew.
There were other problems.
It is interesting that at his trial, one of the people in attendance was a young deacon by the name of Cyril from the Church of Alexandria.
Cyril, like St. Paul with Stephen, Cyril was there consenting to his banishment.
Siddles, the one who insisted just a few years later in 431.
And you couldn't be an orthodox unless you referred to her as the Theatocrist.
And they're all very curious.
All very curious.
This idea that somehow all the orthodox have always spoken with one voice on every question all the time, it just simply won't stand up to history.
But she's grown amongst.
And I think in the course of our lives, she grows on each of us.
I have never known a day in my life when I could speak that I did not invoke the aid of Virgin Mary.
I'm quite confident that if the words Hail Mary full of grace were not my first words,
They were then within the first 50.
I feel very confident of that.
I feel also confident that if my children, in case of my children, I think they were within the first 10.
He'll marry in full of grace.
And yet, when we live in a company, because it is the company of the saints, over the years, some ways we know more about her, just as it was with anyone else.
We begin by loving.
and stay at their company.
I'm thinking today, my brothers and sisters, about the vocation, Mary.
You know, there's a vocation that's common to all Christians because each of us becomes a Christian the same way.
We confess the Lordship of Jesus and our baptized and chrismated, receive holy communion.
That's how we become Christians.
There's a vocation common to all of us.
I spoke about this a couple of Sundays ago.
I said that the common level of all the Christians is the water level of the baptismal font.
It's the common ground in which Jesus makes everybody sit down while he breaks the lobes and the fishes.
We all sit down same place on the same level.
The Lord calls each of his sheep by name, each of us.
But at the same time, each vocation is unique as much as he does call them by name, by name.
If each vocation is just common, if each vocation is also proper to each person, it would appear to me very difficult to model the Christian life.
If we stress that every vocation is unique, then why should I model myself and anybody else?
If it's true that every vocation is common, then why should anybody else be special?
We find, however, that there are other things, as we call them, I think, generic vocations.
Generic.
In the sense that there are different ministries
needed in the church.
And within generic locations, there are special locations.
One recognizes, for example, as opposed to the generic location, that those are called in a special way to preach the gospel.
And within that location, there are specific locations.
For example, that of the Bishop.
St. Paul begins to speak of these specialized locations, excites several places in
in the New Testament, or they just stick with Ephesians 4.
He gave some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints unto the work of the ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ.
Now the building up of the body of Christ is the common good, the location of all of us.
But these specialized vocations have to do with the equipping of the saints onto the work of ministry.
Thus, imitation and modeling become possible.
I find in the saints who have gone before, and I'll start with those of holy scripture, but certainly not limit myself there, we start with the saints who go before and find something we have in common with them as a vocation.
and we try to imitate the model.
And that's entirely as it should be.
Think of the special vocation of the apostles who lived in Jesus' company for three years.
It's a very special vocation.
Can I learn anything about the Christian life from them?
Of course, obviously.
Gospel of Mark says he called them to be with him.
a major thing to be living.
Can I learn something about my vocation as a priest?
I'm starting the apostles.
Well, I certainly hope so.
I certainly hope so.
I'm struck by the fact that they lived in Jesus' company for three years.
Exactly the length required for a seminary degree.
So the first year I guess they were juniors, and then there were middlers, and then there were seniors.
I guess that's how it worked.
having taught in two seminaries myself, I do recall that.
What then shall we say of the one who was with Jesus for 30 years, not counting nine months of pregnancy?
What shall we say about her?
If the apostles are special because of three years, what about the one
who lived in the same home with him for 30 years.
Now, there's a sense in which the vocation of Mary was the most special and the most common.
We honor her as much as that vocation was special.
We imitate her as much as that vocation was common.
Even the ways we imitate her will vary.
The monastics very much claim her because of her consecrated virginity.
That's why she's the abyss of Mount Athos, for example.
And she's every monastery, every Benion, either Orthodox or Roman Catholic, there's this very special place where Mary is a special patroness.
Thousands of monasteries have been named after her.
Thousands of monks have born her name.
Thousands of monastics have felt the special kind to her because of her virginity.
I am personally not being a monastic.
I'm much impassioned with the fact that she was a mother.
And she raised a child.
See, she combines both those locations, doesn't she?
because she certainly stands out as a model for monastics, but she also stands out as a model for domestic life.
I think it's quite possible that the monk of Mount Athos, while he's honoring the Virgin Mary and singing hymns to her, probably hasn't thought a whole lot about her kneeling down and swabbing a skin's knee.
a child, wiping the child's nose, or putting a veil down in front of the child, or worrying about a child, anxious about the child's weather, alarmed about the dangers that surround her family.
In so many ways, hers is the most special of locations because it is the most common.
We imitate her because she has the same vocation of all of us, and that is to incorporate the word of God.
In fact, she so completely incorporated the word of God that she gave it a corpus.
She gave it a bind.
The word of God took very flesh from her own.
And that's the vocation of each of us, is to incorporate the word of God.
Behold, I have made of the Lord.
be it done to me, according to that word, that's for all of us.
It's essentially the central prayer of our Father, that I will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
At the same time, we honor her for what she does not share with us, that she is the Queen Mother, holds the second throne of the kingdom.
have sometimes had to defend that honor to other Christians who are offended by the honor shown in the Virgin Mary.
I don't know how many of my friends, remember I'm a graduate of Southern Jefferson there, how many of my friends have said, yeah, but you're calling her queen of heaven?
I said, do you think she's in heaven?
Well, yeah, of course, sure.
Then how could she be anything else but the queen?
How's it possible?
You don't think she's just like one of us, do you?
In a sense, she is, yes.
But since she certainly is not.
Certainly she is not.
No more than Bathsheba was just like any other woman in Judah, or any of the Queen Mothers of Judah.
Just go through the list of Queen Mothers of Judah.
Were they just like any other women in Judah?
Obviously, there's an affinity, but they were special.
Today we honor the falling asleep of the last of the Queen Mothers of Judah, the mother of the sign, the mother of the Lord.
We honor her entrance into heaven as Queen of Dominotrix.
May her influence over the church abound.
May her spirit fill all of us.
May each of us come to know the faith that she shares with us.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of ancient